---
layout: about
#image: /assets/img/blog/hydejack-9.jpg
#description: >
#  A boutique Jekyll theme for hackers, nerds, and academics,
#  with a focus on personal sites that are meant to impress.
hide_description: true
#redirect_from:
#  - /download/
---

# About

The objective of the project is to improve the detection and mechanical
characterization of the sources of the weak strain signals caused by transient
instability of fault zones, which are sometimes precursory to large seismic
ruptures.

For this, we will take advantage of the optical interferometry technology
Fabry-Perot that our team (ESEO, IPGP and ENS) has developed in the last 10
years for high resolution optical instruments (long base tiltmeter,
seismometer, and strainmeter), and will evaluate their advantages over
commercial instruments.


Two very active seismogenic pilot sites are selected, on the science and
monitoring of which the proponents have been much involved:

  1. **The western rift of Corinth**, focusing here on the pore pressure and
  slow slip instabilities of the fault system, a site monitored since 2000 by
  the Corinth Rift Laboratory (CRL), involving in particular IPGP and ENS. ;
  2. **Inside a deep, active mine in Sweden, in Garpenberg** (BOLIDEN mine),
  for reaching the neighborhood of repeating seismic asperities of metric
  dimension, frequently cycled ("repeaters"), around 1100 m in depth, a site
  monitored for the last 6 years by INERIS.

The optical long base tiltmeter and seismometer have been already qualified,
the former at the top of the La Soufri√®re volcano in Guadeloupe, the latter at
CERN.

The optical strainmeter remains to be developed, on the basis of a buried,
sensitive decametric fiber, integrating the rock strain, more suitable on the
field than classical measurements with Bragg grating systems, limited to
decimetric integrations. First tests with the ESEO interrogator allows us to
aim at a resolution better than 10 nanostrain, resolving the earth tide.


In **Corinth**, the long base tiltmeter will be installed in a tunnel,
associated to an optical strainmeter, in the vicinity of the Psathopyrgos
fault, the most threatening of the site. Another strainmeter will be cemented
in a borehole. The optical seismometer will be installed in a 200 m deep
borehole. During the 3 years of the project, dozens of seismic swarms are
expected at less than 10 km, with possibly detectable episodes of transient
deformation. The records will be jointly analyzed with those of CRL (GNSS,
InSAR, borehole strainmeters, seismic array), using correlation and A.I., and
the source of the strain signals will be modelled.


In **Garpenberg**, a first installation plans 500 m of optic cable in galleries
close to the repeater families (less than 20 m), for an interrogation by
commercial systems DAS and BOTDR, complemented by seismometers, for determining
the precise location of the activated asperities. A second installation plans
to focus on one or a few repeaters, to get very close to them (a few meters)
thanks to small boreholes equipped with optical fibers for our strainmeter
prototype and for the BOTDR. These instruments will be in operation until the
end of the project.


All these measures will be jointly analyzed, integrating the geological
information from the drillings, and with A.I. tools. The rupture cycle of one
asperity will be analyzed and modelled by friction laws on the fault. The rythm
of rupture of these asperities (days-months), guarantees the recording of
several complete cycles, possibly including phases of unstabilities, or even of
rupture initiation or nucleation.


This project will bring new knowledge on the mechanics of deformation and on
the seismic hazard of the two sites. It will also bring generic knowledge on
the seismic-aseismic coupling of fault systems. The validation of the
capabilities of our instruments should favour their use for the geomonitoring
in academic (observatories for seismicity, volcanoes, offhshore,...) as well as
industrial sector (mines, georeservoirs, deep geothermy, ...) of the seismic
cycle of asperities and on the unstable seismic- aseismic coupling in fault
zones.

As a complementary "product" of the project, the new instruments will be
demonstrated and qualified in the field, and advertised for being used in other
contexts of geo-monitoring in academic or industrial environment.
